***************************
GitHub and GitHub Classroom
***************************
We will be using the GitHub Classroom to assign, manage and grade the
programming projects in the DSA I course. You must setup a github account
before you can use the GitHub classroom service.

GitHub.com
==========
GitHub.com is the most popular hosting service for software repositories
managed with git. It provided many useful services to programmers. It is also a
social networks for programmers. Programmers collaborate on open source
projects on GitHub.com.

You can clone public repositories from GitHub. However, you will need to
authenticate yourself when cloning private repositories or pushing changes to
any repositories. There are two protocols available from GitHub.com to
synchronize with the server: 1. HTTPS, 2. SSH. The authentication methods
varies depending on the protocol you use.

**TL;DR: Beginner can choose HTTPS protocol for simplicity while advanced user
who use SSH key pair for other purposes may go for the SSH protocol.** (updated
in 2022)

HTTPS Protocol
--------------

When you work with a URL starting with ``https://github.com/``, you are using
the HTTPS protocol to connect to the server. To authenticate yourself, a
user name and a personal access token will be asked in the first time when you
try to connect to the server using your GitHub account. In most of the
operating system, your credential will be stored and you no longer need to
input the next time.

The personal access token is not your password. You must generate it for your
GitHub.com account. Read this `instruction`__ to learn how to generate the
token.

.. __: https://docs.github.com/en/authentication/keeping-your-account-and-data-secure/creating-a-personal-access-token

SSH Protocol
------------

When you work with a URL starting with ``git@github.com:``, you are using the
SSH protocol to connect to the server. To authenticate yourself, you must set
up a key pair first. You only need to set it up once to allow future access.
Read this `instruction`__ on how to set up ssh key pairs.

.. __: https://docs.github.com/en/authentication/connecting-to-github-with-ssh/adding-a-new-ssh-key-to-your-github-account


GitHub Classroom
================

The GitHub Classroom is a service from GitHub.com. It is free of charges for
educational usage. It is a great way to assign, collect and grade programming
assignments.

Before you start to work on the assignment, you have to sign up an account at
GitHub.com. You will be asked to bind your account with your name listed in the
roster in the GitHub classroom. **Never skip the roster** when you are asked to
bind the account. Unlinked accounts will bring in many problems in the grading
process.

To use GitHub Classroom for assignment, follow the following steps:

#. Accept the assignment

   A project repository will be created for you and you can refresh the page
   after several seconds to get the URL to your repository.

#. Follow the general project workflow in the
   :doc:`programming project document</course/project>`. Follow the steps
   listed below to clone the initial code:

   #. Copy the repository URI from your project repository web page (the green
      **code** button). Either using SSH protocol URI start with
      ``git@git.github.com`` or HTTPS protocol URI start with
      ``https://github.com/``.
   #. Run ``git clone <URI>`` in the parent directory you plan to put the
      project directory in.
   #. A new directory will be created and you can start developing based on the
      starting files in the directory.

.. note::

  After each push to the repository, auto-grading actions will be triggered.
  Wait a couple of minutes until the grades is updated. Check the result in the
  *Action* tab in the GitHub repository page by clicking the latest commit.
  Expend the *auto-grading* section to see details.

  You may refer to the details on the linear git workflow employed in the
  general project workflow in the the :doc:`git document</tools/git>`.
